So just like we have the basic
building block of what
HTML is which is the tag right?
Place to that word 50 times
in the past bit of the class.
The basic building blocks
of CSS is the rule.
So a rule looks like this.
It's got this is called the selector,
the H1 here.
And then inside of it, you're gonna have a
bunch of properties that you're gonna set.
But this entire thing you
would call a rule in CSS.
Let's explain that in just a second.
So we're gonna define a bunch
of rules which are gonna define
the style of our particular website.
So again, cascading style sheets.
Not a programming language per say in the
sense that it's just declaring that if you
have this, it looks like this.
That's the entire thing of what CSS does.
You're just giving the browsers hey,
if you recognize this pattern,
then apply these styles to it.
That's it.
If you match this selector,
apply these styles.
That's the entire extent of CSS, it is
really no more complicated than that.
So if I wanted a rule that
said all h1's on my webpage
will be colored red, you would write this.
That's what this rule says it says.
All h1 which is what the selector
says will be colored red.
So again,
this is like we were talking about our car
analogy where it's touching to tell you
how it looks and how are arranged in
some of those other things like that.
But it doesn't change the content, right?
So I'm not saying that all
h1's will have the text blur.
You don't do that with CSS.
You do, all h1's will look like this.
So that's what this would do.
It would make all h1's.
So this is an h1 be colored red like this.
So again selecting this the h1 is
called the selector this part here.
You're basically saying you're
giving the browser of look for
anything that matches this pattern.
And that can be a lot more
complicated than just h1 but
I'm showing you a very simple one.
But it's gonna match your HTML, right?
CSS does nothing by itself,
it needs HTML, it's paired to HTML.
Whereas like you and I just did a section
on HTML we technically didn't need any CSS
for the HTML to be functional.
A style sheet by itself
does nothing it needs
something to attach to any
HTML to attach to, okay?
This part here,
the color colon is called the property.
And there's Some 350 properties.
If you look at this, these are all
the things that you can set in CSS.
Most of them you'll
never even think about.
Page break before,
I don't even know what that does.
I never even heard of it until literally
right now as I'm teaching the class on CSS
to you, someone's gonna say like but
Brian it does this I don't know.
Haven't had to use it before,
which is to say I Google
things a lot when I need them.
And that's totally okay.
It's very expected.
So anyway, the properties.
There's 350 of them.
You'll never use most of them.
Same kind of thing where we had
that zip distribution of them.
You use some of them a lot color.
You can use color a lot.
As you might imagine we call it
a things different things a lot.
Page break before, almost never.
Cuz again, I don't know what it is.
Maybe you're very different than me,
but probably not.
So maybe, yeah, 50 to 100 or extremely
useful and there's a long tail after that.
So color property affects
the color of the font, right?
So this is red.
It actually affects more than that.
But we almost never use it for
anything besides that.
So, in other words,
just mostly use it for font color.
And then this here is the value.
So this value can be any number of things.
It can be a named color.
It can be a hex color.
So let's just inspect this and
mess around with it and see what happens.
We're gonna make this go to the side,
top the right.
Make this bigger, get rid of that.
Okay, so you can see here I
have this color red here.
We can make that blue, right?
We can make this.
There's so many.
Look how many colors are.
Some of them are really funny.
I think my favorite is peru.
If you didn't know that's
the color of peru.
Why is it the color of peru?
I don't know, but that's what it is.
But most things that you would expect,
I don't know.
I think there's a lavender.
If you wanna make lavender blush,
that's a nice color difference.
Medium orchid.
I don't know.
That's that's a medium orchid, right?
So there's a bunch from.
Those are called, named colors.
But also technically if I put 555 that
will be a shade of black, right?
So there's hexadecimal colors,
you don't have to really care about that.
But there's a variety of ways
that we can denote color.
I'm gonna stick with red though.
So red there is the value.
You can see that there's
named colors as 150 of those.
Understands hex values.
Which is FF000 which would be to red.
Yeah, so FF this here would represent red.
It's actually the same color as red,
this red.
RGB which red, green blue.
So 255 it goes from zero to 255.
You don't really have to care
too much about any of this.
I'm just kind of giving you examples here.
This would be red and then HSL which
if you are a color design nerd,
HSL which is Hue Saturation Lightness,
I think is what that stands for.
This would also be red as well.
I understand HSL far less but
it's also very useful if you're trying
to do color modifications on the fly.
Yeah, so all those things evaluate
to the same color as red.
You don't have to really know how all
these work, I'm just kind of trying to
demonstrate to you that the value
can change contextually.
If you're super interested into how
all of that works, there's a great
article on how colors work on CSS tricks,
and I left a link there for you.
Okay, and then last thing to note here,
semicolon, very important.
You must put a semicolon.
It's like a period at
the end of the sentence here.
It's punctuation to let the browser know,
I finished this complete property, pair,
I'm done, I'm moving on to the next one.
If you forget it, the browser will not
understand it and will ignore it, right?
So make sure you're putting
your semicolons, okay?.
So now I have this one,
which has a lot more stuff going on.
So I just wanted to demonstrate to you,
one rule can have a lot of stuff inside of
it, and typically will have
a lot of stuff inside of it.
So color lime green.
That's why this one is this
lovely shade of lime green.
Font size 60 pixels.
So some of these have units, right?
So pixels is px, right?
It's 60 pixels high.
It's actually usually not literally that.
It's just like a relative measurement.
There's also several styles of size.
So we use pixels but there's Ms
there's Xs there's vertical heights.
There's a ton of different ways
to measure widths and heights but
pixels is the most common.
So in other words if you put font size
60 with nothing, it won't do anything.
Right.
It's like asking someone how tall are you?
And they just say, I'm three.
Three, what?
You have to tell them what?
I'm three feet, three meters,
three yards, right?
So that's what this is here.
Font, weight, normal.
That's saying instead of being bolded,
be normally, right?
So it's not bolded, but
you can also have light as well.
So if I put bold there, right?
Or I think there's a lighter, right?
Some fonts don't have lighter.
But there's like 600,
900, that's really bold.
If you have 100, looks like this doesn't
have a 100, but that'd be really thin.
It depends on each font, right?
Some fonts have it some fonts don't.
What else here?
Text decoration right?
Underlined so that's why this is
underlined now you might ask me hey Brian,
how do you know that text
decoration underline go together?
It's like I don't ever remember I
always have to Google it Right.
So I just Google CSS underline and
the first thing that shows up will
be text decoration underline.
But I mean, there's some
absurd things in here as well.
I think there's over line.
Yeah, there's an over line.
I don't know why it's there, but it is.
There might be, is it strikethrough?
And it's not lline through.
Yeah, so if you want to do strikethrough,
as you can see,
all this stuff kind of comes hazy to me.
When's the last time I
had to do strikethrough?
I don't know if I've ever
actually professionally had to do
strikethrough, right.
So it's probably the last
time I taught this course.
But it's all, this is kind of what
I'm talking about I want you to be
exposed to things that you'll see now and
you'll never remember a strikethrough.
But five years later when you're showing
someone else how to code, right?
You're gonna say I remember
there is strikethrough and
you just Google CSS strikethrough and
you'll just get it right?
That's things that you know
that you don't know, all right?
It's things that you knew that you knew,
but you could remember and it could
eventually figure out again, but you
don't have to on the tip of your tongue.
That's most of programming by the way.
It's a bunch of stuff that you know,
plus a bunch of stuff that
you could Google later.
Okay, so we'll leave that as underline.
Text transform.
So this is all uppercase now.
So notice this one up here, this is an H1.
Notice this wasn't all uppercased.
But here it is.
That's it this text transform does.
As you might imagine, you can change
this from uppercase to lowercase.
And now everything is lowercase.
There's capitalize right?
Which will capitalize
the beginning of everything.
There's some other ones full width.
I didn't even know that was
a thing until literally right now.
Full size can't.
I'm gonna guess that probably goes
with Japanese or some other language.
So you'll find that's another thing here
is lots of these have to do with other
languages besides English because
rightfully so the internet is for
everybody in all languages.
So they also have their uppercase and
lowercase built into that because
uppercase and lowercase is a thing for
Latin based languages and
Latin character based languages.
But it's not a thing for other languages
that have no concept of uppercase and
lowercase.
I remember I worked on the Turkish
translation of netflix.com,
we had text transform to uppercase
in several places on netflix.com.
Apparently that breaks Turkish.
I'm trying to remember it was Turkish or
Arabic or something.
It was a language I was working on
unfortunately don't remember which
one it is.
But we had to take it out of everywhere
because it didn't make sense in some of
the languages that we were
translating Netflix into.
So that's some things to be aware of.
We have a border of three pixels in pink.
This can be changed to orange, right?
This can be changed to dotted or line.
I don't know.
There's a bunch of other,
was line working?
No it wasn't.
Dashed, there it is.
So there's a bunch of
way of doing borders.
Let's go back to.
Oops, just refresh the page.
You can come in here and say border
dash radius and say five pixels.
Notice there that makes it like
a nice little rounded corner there.
Or we can put 15 pixels it
gets even more rounded.
100 pixels and then it just ends
up being round at the end, right?
So you can do anything you want with CSS.
You can take things that look one way and
make them look another way.
And it's all just like this combination
of making these selectors with
rules with all these properties that
kind of interact with each other
to create whatever you're
trying to make happen.
A question that I had when I was
learning to code is why is it font dash
something sometimes and
why is it text dash something other times?
Well, one it is because it is.
But the real answer to that is
think about the font, right?
So when you're on Word,
you can select a different font, right?
You're actually changing character sets.
So that's what font is it's actually
messing with the character set
that the glyphs that
you're interacting with.
Whereas the text stuff actually just
interacts with the text itself,
it doesn't mess with the glyph set, right?
So when I underlined something,
it doesn't modify the glyphs set.
It's just drawing a line underneath it and
I'm transforming the text from
lowercase to uppercase, but
doesn't matter if the glyph says
changes which glyph it's showing.
You never have to care about that.
That was something that bothered me for
years after I learned to write CSS, and
I finally bothered to
look it up once time.
So I try and throw little tidbits in
there of things that used to bother me so
they don't have to bother you.
So yeah, parents and children.
I have div here and I have a selector
here that says div, color, blue.
That'll actually permeate
down here to the children.
So you can have parents
CSS affect children.
I found that frustrated me when
I was learning to code is like,
why is this one blue and it's because I
had a parent that was permeating it's CSS
cascading down to the child.
So, you'll notice I use some
terminology here for parents and child.
The parent will be the outer the HTML tag
and the child will be the inner HTML tag.
That's common terminology
when talking about HTML.
So even if I do body here and I have this
h1 here, that's all the way nested down,
this the body color orange will permeate
all the way down here to this h1, right?
It just affects everything inside of it.